RFC to change dependency loading process (#1564)
uxlfoundation/oneTBB: rfcs/proposed/loading-dependencies/loading-dependencies-by-module-name.org

while checking that genuine version of the dependency is used. However, not
loading the binary because of the failed signature verification might not be
always desired. Especially, during the development phase or for a software
distributor that does not have the signature with which to sign the binary.
Therefore, to preserve backward compatibility of such usage models, it is
essential to have possibility to disable signature verification.

* Proposal
Based on the analysis in the "Introduction" section and to support versatile
distribution models of oneTBB this RFC proposes to:
1. Introduce signature verification step to the run-time dependency loading
   process.
2. Introduce the ~TBB_VERIFY_DEPENDENCY_SIGNATURE~ compilation option that would
   enable signature verification, and set it ~ON~ by default.
3. Update documentation to include information about new
   ~TBB_VERIFY_DEPENDENCY_SIGNATURE~ flag.
4. Pass ~LOAD_LIBRARY_SAFE_CURRENT_DIRS~ flag to the ~LoadLibraryEx~ calls so
   that current working directory is excluded from the list of directories in
   which the system loader looks when trying to find and resolve dependency.

> 5. Change dependency loading approach to load by module names only.

Reviewer: Which parts of this proposal apply to Windows only, Linux only, and both?

Author: Clarified where parts belong.

#+title: Loading Dependencies By Module Name

* Introduction

> There is a well-known attack that implies loading of a malicious dependency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a well-known attack that involves loading of a malicious dependency
```

instead of the original one without notice to the party that does this loading.
In the industry it is usually called /DLL injection/ or /DLL preloading attack/
and it is mostly associated with the Windows platform as it is known to be

> particularly vulnerable to this kind of attack.[1] One of the recommendations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
particularly vulnerable to this kind of attack [1]. One of the recommendations
```

that safeguards against this type of attack is to specify fully qualified path

> to a dependency.[2]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to a dependency [2].
```

Historically, oneTBB loads its optional dependencies during its initialization

> process when these dependencies can be used for the first time. The way oneTBB

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
process when these dependencies are used for the first time. The way oneTBB
```

does this is by building full paths to their dependencies using the path where

> oneTBB library resides by itself. It is the only sensible path which can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the oneTBB library itself resides. It is the only sensible path which can be
```

obtained by oneTBB, whose usage conditions are not known at the time of
development. The purpose is to minimize the risk of a DLL injection attack issue
so that only certain paths are probed by the system loader. However,

> dependencies of a dependency are still searched by their module names only.[3]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dependencies of a dependency are still searched by their module names only [3].
```

So, the risk is minimized only for a dependency itself and not for the libraries
it depends on, not to mention that the file of a dependency can be replaced in
the file system by an attacker, which breaks even that protection. Besides that,
loading of a dependency by specifying full path represents an inconvenience to
the developers who want to make use of their own variant of a dependency. Not
only they need to place their variant of a dependency to all of the places from
which it is going to be found and loaded by every client component that depends
on it, but also this makes problematic the implementation (if not impossible) of

> some scenarios where being loaded dependency maintains single state shared among

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
some scenarios where the dependency  being loaded maintains single state shared among
```

all its clients. Such scenarios are hard to implement because copies of the same
DLL loaded from different paths are considered to be different DLLs and in
certain cases there is no support for filesystem linking mechanism to point to a

> single file.[4, 5]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
single file [4, 5].
```

So, what is the main problem due to which loading by a module name makes Windows
much more vulnerable to DLL injection than Linux?

Besides difference in the order of accessing paths specified in the environment,
Windows also prioritizes searching in the directory from which the application

> is loaded and current working directory.[2] Assuming that application is loaded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is loaded and current working directory [2]. Assuming that application is loaded
```

> from the directory that requires administrative permission on write, which is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from a directory that requires administrative permission on write, which is
```

usually the case, it is the current working directory that forms the main DLL

> preloading attack scenario.[1]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
preloading attack scenario [1].
```

There are approaches to exclude the current working directory from the search
order. However, for a library to avoid process-wide changes to the search order

> the only viable solution for a run-time loading is to pass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the only viable solution for run-time loading is to pass
```

> ~LOAD_LIBRARY_SAFE_CURRENT_DIRS~ flag to the ~LoadLibraryEx~ Windows API.[6]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~LOAD_LIBRARY_SAFE_CURRENT_DIRS~ flag to the ~LoadLibraryEx~ Windows API [6].
```

With the removal of the current working directory from loader's consideration,
the search order on Windows starts having little difference with the search
order on Linux. The difference includes the order in which directories specified
in the environment and system directories are considered, and the presence of

> the first step of looking into an application directory on Windows.[2, 7]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the first step of looking into an application directory on Windows [2, 7].
```

Since the system environment variables and the environment of other processes

> cannot be changed, the only vulnerable place is an application directory.[8, 9]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cannot be changed, the only vulnerable place is an application directory [8, 9].
```

Because the application can be installed in a directory that does not require
administrative permissions on write, it still can be started by an account
having them. Unlike Linux systems, for the process started with administrative
permissions, the paths specified in the environment and the application

> directory are still considered by the Windows system loader.[2, 7] Therefore, an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
directory are still considered by the Windows system loader [2, 7]. Therefore, an
```

attacker can update permissive installation directory with a malicious version
of a binary, hence making it loaded in a process with elevated permissions. Note
that specifying fully qualified path to the dependency does not help in this
case.

Fortunately, there is a signature verification process that helps validating the
authenticity of a binary before loading it into process address space and
starting its execution. This allows making use of the established search order
while checking that genuine version of the dependency is used. However, not
loading the binary because of the failed signature verification might not be
always desired. Especially, during the development phase or for a software
distributor who does not have the signature with which to sign the binary.
Therefore, to preserve backward compatibility of such usage models, it is

> essential to have possibility to disable signature verification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
essential to have the possibility to disable signature verification.
```
